# Genome Storage Exercise
## How much computer storage is required for 1000 Genomes?

### WES vs. WGS
WGS is used to sequence the entire genome. If the sequencing data is encoded with 2 bits and there is a perfect genome, without overhead, the storage would require 715 MB. However, sequencing is performed with short reads that are later aligned, and each segment of DNA isn't read only once but several times to allow the alignment and to improve accuracy. For the assignment, I will assume the sequencing was performed with 30x coverage.

WES only covers ~1-2% of the genome (4) and is therefore much smaller. Usually it is performed with a coverage of >100x, but I will asusme a coverage of 30x for this exercise.

### Data generated by WGS of 1000 genomes for different file formats

- **FASTQ:** This is the data we recieve directly after sequencing. It contains the sequence of each read, with a quality score for every base and additional information. For 30x coverage, 1 genome produces roughly 200GB of data, although it varies widely (1). However, they can be gzip compressed to save storage space.    
Without compression, for 1000 genomes, it would therefore take ***200 TB*** of data.

- **BAM:** BAM is the binary version of SAM, and encodes the same information, but much smaller. However, a 30x genome still requires ~ 100GB (2).     
For 1000 genomes, that would be ***100 TB*** of data.

- **SAM:** SAM is a text based format for storing the reads aligned to a reference sequence. It takes about 4 or more times as much storage as a BAM file (3). Therefore, for a 30x genome, it might use ~ 400GB of data.     
For 1000 genomes, that would be ***400 TB*** of data.

- **VCF:** VCF, or variant call format, only stores positions where the sequenced DNA differs from the reference genome and some metadata. I would say the size of this VCF file depends on the amount of variation present in the sequenced genome. However, it is often only ~125MB (1).    
For 1000 genomes, that would be only ***125 GB*** of data.

- **FASTA:** FASTA contains only one header, and then the sequence. In WGS, typically only the reference genome is stored as FASTA.    
The reference genome is typically around 3 GB.

### Data generated by WES of 1000 genomes for different file formats
WES covers only ~1-2% of the genome, so I am going to estimate the storage size as the predicted size for WGS multiplied by 0.015.

- FASTQ: ~ 3 TB
- BAM: ~ 1.5 TB
- SAM: ~ 6 TB
- VCF: ~ 1.88 GB

### Assosiated costs 
Assuming that 1PB of storage costs 500'000CHF (including all associated costs), storage of 1000 genomes in the different file formats would take:

**WGS**
- FASTQ: 0.2PB * 500'000CHF = 100'000CHF
- BAM: 50'000 CHF
- SAM: 200'000 CHF
- VCF: 62.5 CHF

**WES**
- FASTQ: 1500 CHF
- BAM: 750CHF
- SAM: 3000 CHF
- VCF: 0.94 CHF

### What file type should be used for what?

**For full archival purposes**
- FASTQ, if necessary: preserves sequence and quality scores and thus only file type that allows complete re-analysis should that ever be needed.
- CRAM: compressed version of BAM, specifically designed for long term archiving. It can easily be re-converted into BAM file but uses much less storage space.

**For storing called variants**
- VCF files: store the detected genetic variations, but use very little space. 

**For browser visualisation**
- BED files: essential for visualising the data in genome browsers such as UCSC or IGV. 





### Sources
(1) https://medium.com/precision-medicine/how-big-is-the-human-genome-e90caa3409b0    
(2) https://blog.dnanexus.com/2018-07-23-breaking-down-crumble    
(3) https://samtools.org/what-is-the-difference-between-sam-and-bam-files/    
(4) https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1098360021026162    

